The Sounds True Podcast Network.
>> My worldview is that reincarnation is a
simple fact of life and it leads to an
accumulation and development of our
lifetimes incarnation by incarnation.
But it also leads to an accumulation at
the level of soul.
Welcome friends to this special series
from Sounds True once more exploring
reincarnation and the gap between lives.
[Music]
In this episode, my guest is Christopher
Bash, professor emmeritus in the
department of philosophy and religious
studies at Youngstown State University,
where he taught for more than three
decades.
He's also the author of several
influential books. They've been
influential in my life and in the lives
of many spiritual explorers, including a
book called Life Cycles, Reincarnation,
and the Web of Life. It's a book
described as one of the most intelligent
and broad-ranging discussions of
reincarnation
ever encountered.
He's also the author of the book LSD and
the Mind of the Universe, a book in
which Chris chronicles a 20-year
exploration of the structure of the
cosmos through his engagement in more
than 70 highdosese LSD sessions.
Friends, stay with us.
Chris, welcome.
>> Hi, Tammy. Very glad to be here with
you.
>> I'm so excited to have this conversation
with you.
>> Really, I'm kind of jumping out of my
skin, so to speak.
>> Here's where I want to start. You write,
"Reincarnation
is an idea that's hard to see at first,
but once seen, it changes everything."
And
>> I want to break this down a little bit.
>> Hard to see at first. What allowed you
to see it at first?
>> Ian Stevenson's research. He was at the
University of Virginia. He's considered
the the Charles Darwin of reincarnation
thought. uh his research.
Oh, about 11 books published documenting
in detailed studies children from around
the world who have spontaneous memories
of their previous lives. And he was able
to uh get to them, document their
memories, verify their memories or
falsify uh and published multiple books.
Uh and that's that just turned my mind
around. And then later as I began to
move into my own self-exploration
both in the LSD work and also with
hypnotherapy I encountered a number of
my own former lives and worked with
them. Um so it was both a personal
experiential uh encounter but first it
was an intellectual encounter with Ian
Stevenson's work
>> Dr. Dr. Ian Stevenson's work and the
continuing work at the division of
perceptual studies at University of
Virginia has been really part of the
inspiration behind this special series
at Sounds True Exploring Reincarnation.
And we have two different guests
included in the series who are part of
the division of perceptual studies which
brings me to the next question. 3,000
documented stories, very compelling
research. Why is this hard to see for so
many of us?
>> It's hard to see. U first of all,
because the effects of reincarnation are
subtle. Uh the ending of a life at death
is definitive. The beginning of
appearing of life at birth is kind of
clear. But but the carryover
continuities of reincarnation are
subtle. But I think the most important
reason that it's hard for many of us to
see it is because
basically science is the religion of our
era. And science in its early stages has
been wedded to a a concept that matter
is the only thing that's real. There is
nothing in the universe that we can't
explain except reducing it to its
material substrate.
And this belief basically tells us that
it suggests that our mind basically is
generated by our brain. And when our
brain disappears, our w our mind
disappears too like a light bulb that
goes out. And so with this belief that
everything is material that there is no
independent spiritual universe and with
the belief that our mind reduces to
brain then we basically undercut any
possibility of allowing the existence of
reincarnation because it assumes the a
parallel dimension of spiritual reality
and that makes it hard for my colleagues
for example in the department where I
talk it's very hard for them to really
even look at the evidence seriously
because they have such counterveailing u
belief systems.
>> And then we get to the final part of
this quote which is really the most
important to me. Once seen, it changes
everything. And I want to talk about
that because I'm noticing even now as
we're going deeper into the interviews
in this series, impacts that it's having
on how I view my life.
>> Yeah. a a level of relaxation that's
starting to come in that previously was
unknown. And I'm curious how you in your
own life this taking on of a
reincarnationist view instead of as you
call it a one-timer's perspective, how
it's changed things for you. Big
question.
>> Yeah. Well, there's lots of spin-offs on
that question. uh it does change
everything. And
as you live within a reincarnational
worldview
uh and kind of think through it and live
through it and apply it to your life
circumstances, it deepens. And so what
what stands out in the early years is
different from what stands out in the
later years. uh and it all hinges, I
think, upon an understanding that we
have a vast quantity of time in which to
live and develop and grow within the
universe. We don't we aren't simply a
100-year-old project adjunct to the
universe's billion multi-billionyear
project but we are actually ancient
beings who have been reincarnating for
millennia millennia hundreds of
thousands of years and as such we are
part of the universe's extensive uh
development now as a a philosopher that
means a great deal to me because when I
look at the magnificent
photographs coming out of the Hubble or
other you know space telescopes and I
see this magnificent un universe massive
and vast in its depth and beauty
if I only live one time through I
basically am a part-time player in this
I'm a sideshow in this universe but once
we understand that nature and the
intelligence within and behind nature
has found a way not only to evolve whole
species as we think in evolution but to
invol evolve individuals within certain
species as in human beings then I think
we have it just is a new starting point
it's a new starting point it changes
your understanding of your identity
because as beautiful and as important uh
as our individual body mind awareness is
our ego is it's just one facet of the
the diamond that the soul is there are
other facets we can encounter, we can
meet and which we will become uh part of
this larger diamond as we die or even as
we wake up on this planet. It changes
your relationships to your children. So
you stop seeing them as somehow an
extension of your genetic and your
wife's genetic heritage. You begin to
see that your genetic matrix is a nest
which catches an incoming soul. And so
the child that you're holding may be
thousands of years older than you are in
a soul perspective. And so I don't see
children as children anymore. And I
don't see old people as old people
anymore. I I tend to think in terms of
souls and there are some children who
are very old souls and some adults who
are very young souls in in their
foolishness. Um so it to me it's it's a
fresh starting point. It also speaks to
of course always paired with
reincarnation is the concept of karma of
cause and effect and that there is a a
cause and effect that derives from the
choices that we make in our extended in
our extended lives that those choices
carry over and set up the conditions
within which I'm living in this
lifetime. And then when you explore the
the data more carefully, you learn that
there is a great deal of evidence that
suggests that we choose the life that we
are born into.
And that makes an enormous different
difference because when we look at our
life and it may be a life of pain and
suffering, it may be of unexpected
hardship. It may be a life of ease
to understand that we chose this life at
a time when we know knew more than we
know now. We chose this life that tends
to deepen our uh commitment to working
with the conditions of this life,
trusting in a in a deeper intelligence
that brought us into these
circumstances. So to me, it's it's an
absolutely fresh starting point in
philosophy. I mean it really your your
whole philosophical insights diverge
between the one road which says we only
incarnate once and another road which
says no we incarnate many times they
very go in very different directions.
Now, there's one place I want to slow
down and understand a bit more because
when it comes to the research at the
Division of Perceptual Studies, 3,000
documented cases of young children who
remember their past lives, anyone who
looks at this and really kicks the tire,
so to speak, has to come away taking
that seriously.
>> I think so. Now the interpretation of it
is of course more something that we can
discuss. So when you were talking about
how
this evidence which leads to a belief
these are reincarnated young children
they remember lives they could have had
no access to that information. Okay, I'm
with you. But now you're saying there's
data that says we choose use the word
data that we choose our lives. and that
I became a little skeptical there and I
was like is there this seems like it's
more a realm of
>> positing a theory but I'm curious how
you view it.
>> Yeah,
I think the work done at the University
of Virginia department is critically
important for putting reincarnation on
the table with strong intellectual
credentials.
But personally, when I look at Ian
Stevens's magnificent work, it became
clear to me that he doesn't have a fully
de he doesn't have a a rich textured
understanding of the entire cycle of
reincarnation, what happens to us when
we die, what the structure of
post-mortem existence is, and what the
deeper intentional
purpose of reincarnation might be. And
that's perfectly fine because his job is
to work close to the data and the data
which he's working with is data where
you have two lives which are very
closely imshed so that the time interval
between the death of one and the birth
of the other is 2 and 1/2 years for his
subjects and the distance the between
the life place of the first life and the
life place of the second in life is
approximately 50 miles. So that's faster
than the population at large and closer
than the population at large. So these
are an exceptional subset of human
beings who have this memory of their
former lives. There is other uh work
Edith Fior's work and people looking at
larger demographics trying to give
people experiences of regression and
then trying to document where they went
to and looking at the larger numbers. We
find that people incarnate on average
much more slowly and much farther a
field than they do. Now
once you allow reincarnation on your
maybe table and you can then start
looking at other bodies of evidence. You
can look at the bodies of evidence that
come out of the mystical traditions, the
spiritual traditions. Vadriana
Buddhism's extensive you know treatment
of reincarnation
particularly in the self-consciously
reincarnated uh enlightened beings
toolkus we can also look at the evidence
coming from past life therapy which I
don't think is as strong a body of
evidence as Ian Stevenson's evidence but
once Ian Stevenson's evidence is
absorbed it gives us permission I think
to look seriously at the patterns that
emerge in past life therapy work. And
here I'm thinking particularly on the
question you ask about choosing our next
life. I'm thinking of Michael Newton's
work, his excellent books, Journey of
Souls and Destiny of Souls. And Michael
Newton was a therapist who got drawn
into past life therapy. He was working
as a past life therapist,
hypnotherapist.
And then he made a mistake one day and
he accidentally gave an ambiguous
instruction which his client ran with
and he began to realize that his client
was describing what happened to him
after his death in his previous
lifetime. He did not think this was even
possible. But he took eventually
hundreds of people through a a
transition from their previous in uh
incarnation and death. And he began to
ask them questions to explore and
provide content to the nature of
post-mortem existence. And he found that
there is a civilization of spiritual
reality. There is a civilization. There
is a kind of almost if you will a
university of education and going on in
spiritual reality. And one of the things
he found his clients describing
is choosing their next incarnation and
what he calls um following one client
the ring of destiny where basically with
your spiritual guides you come before
this council and you are shown several
lives that they recommend that you would
choose from to develop your own
spiritual capac. capacities long
greater. You don't have to accept any of
them and some people don't. Um but you
can ex you see the early stages of your
life. You see a sense of what the
trajectory is. You don't see the whole
of the life but you get a an
experiential contact with what the
themes of this life would be and who you
would be spending this life with. So
that we make a choice to choose the life
that we have incarnated. And we do it in
concert with the other beings that we
have incarnate that we are incarnating
with together. So it's not just each
individual separately but it's
incarnating in groups incarnating in
patterns to support each other in our
collective work.
>> I think the reason Chris that my
questioning mind comes in. So, I'm with
you with reincarnation being on the
maybe table. And I think the listeners
to this series, there's been enough
said. They've they've gotten there. But
when it gets to things like the
structure of post-mortem experience and
the counsel that's there, my spirit
guides that are guiding me, you know, so
many people say different things about
it. Like they have different, it's not
like there's some uh agreement across
the board. 90% of the people say the
same thing about post-mortem experience.
So that's where I get confused. I don't
have my own access to it. Yeah.
>> I can't say for my own experience. And
when I hear a bunch of different things,
I think I don't know.
>> Yeah, that's understandable, isn't it?
You know, I think something similar
happens in studying near-death episodes
that people do seem to have different
experiences when they almost die and
come back. Um and sometimes these
experiences are seem to be contradictory
be one person has a near-death
experience in which Jesus is the savior
of the universe only son of god and
another one person has an experience in
which he sees all the religious saints
and and saviors as simply um
manifestations of older souls on earth
and no one being superior to the other.
But when you take all of the experiences
together and you look at them critically
and you begin to sift through them,
certain universal patterns begin to
emerge. Patterns which Kenneth Ring has
documented beautifully in a number of
his books. And I think the same thing is
true uh with reincarnation research.
There is a wide diversity of opinion on
what happens in postmortem existence.
But if you take the large body of data
and you sort of sift out really looking
at it the data I think which has the
most value is data which has been
gathered by professionals
uh who are critical critical posture to
their evidence. I think once again you
begin to find universal trajectories
moving through the data so that it's not
simply a matter of he says she says and
it's it's hopelessly chaotic. I think
there are structural similarities and
once you place the reincarnation
memories alongside the near-death
episode memories and you place that
alongside this some of the deep
spiritual traditions teachings on the
structure of the BO and you place that
alongside psychedelic deep psychedelic
experiences for accessing these domains.
What you find is that these bodies of
data do not diverge in a hundred
different directions that there's
actually a convergence of opinion on at
a deeper structural level. So I think
it's important to be looking at that
structural content.
>> Chris, we're connecting. I feel quite
happy about how you're uh hearing my
concerns and taking me step by step. So
let's keep going here. What are the
trends you could say the patterns the
identifiable places of agreement
about the structure of post-mortem
experience and dare I say what we can
expect
well I think we can expect to be
surprised by how valued we are by the
intelligence that's behind the entire
entire manifest universe. Um, we I think
will be surprised by the love that's
waiting for us, the the unqualified
acceptance of our being and the depth of
that love that's waiting for us and the
intelligence that we are being returned
to.
Basically, death is a time of
homecoming, a time of expansion, a time
of remembering things that we forgot
when we incarnated. A time of
remembering the deeper our deeper
identity which I think of as our soul
identity. A time of remembering deeper
the deeper texture of relationships that
the people that we are connected to
importantly in our incarnate life that
those relationships have a history a
deeper history which we can remember
when we die. uh and so that the
community of beings when we die is a not
a community of simply dead human beings
but they're a community of souls and
souls are 100,000 year old beings not
hundred-year-old beings I think we can
uh I think what happens when we die is
there is a period of of gradual
reintegration we are escorted into this
experiential territory gradually
carefully uh We are assisted in this
process. Some people need more remedial
work than others. People who have given
themselves over to violence and anger
and injuring of other people, violating
the fundamental oneness of life often
have to be um taken back into oneness
carefully and gradually with a lot of
attention to healing. Other people whose
lives have been given over to compassion
and generosity and service move through
this transitional period more slowly.
But eventually there is this
transitional period ends that the
process of digesting your life.
Digesting everything that happened to
you. Everything that you experience the
what the near-death episode people
experience as the life review happens
when we die. Uh but eventually that
entire digesting of your most recent
life ends. You return to your deeper
identity. It's not like Chris Bash
doesn't just return to a deeper Chris
Bash, but Chris Bash reintegrates with
Chris Bash's soul, which is a a much
much larger uh extensive identity. And
the community of beings in the afterlife
is basically there this community of
souls, community of beings with deeper
knowledge. One of the other patterns is
that older learners help younger
learners. It's a process in which um
it's just recognized that people are at
different stages of their own spiritual
and evolutionary development. Older
learners help younger learners and we
tend to travel together in groups. It's
kind of the most natural thing. Students
do it at the university. They form
relationships with people in their
freshman year and they tend to stay in
touch through their entire cycle.
So there are these patterns.
Uh
I think underlying all of it though for
me the most important is the
extraordinary
love and uh acceptance and intelligence
and wisdom that we are met with so
profoundly that it completely just takes
our fear away and takes all of our
misgivings about dying and overwhelms us
with this profound sense of the joy
of being where we are. And this is
described by the near-death episode
people extensively. Just so much joy
that they don't want to go back when
they're told they have to go back.
They'd rather be where they where they
are. I think these are uh these run
these are some just some of the
universal themes that run through the
deeper accounts. Now, one thread I want
to pick up because you talked about this
notion of having choice about our next
incarnation.
>> And I think at least before recording
this series, I held a a viewpoint. I'm
not sure if it was valid or not. I guess
my working hypothesis was that some
souls have a choice and some don't. And
it depends on the strength of your habit
patterns. And if your habit patterns,
your karma, if you will, are just so
strong, your next incarnation's just
going to be a product of that. And that
actually having a choice is a a
relatively
evolved place where that option occurs.
And I'm wondering how you see that.
>> I think that's makes sense to me what
you're describing. I think of it sort of
since I'm in education, I tend to fall
back on educators metaphors. Um, when
people are in the first or second grade,
we don't give them any choice of what
they study in school. Here's your books,
here's your curriculum, this is what you
do. And as you move into high school,
you have more choices of what courses
you want to take. And when you go into
college, you have radically more freedom
to self-define your educational
trajectory. And I think it probably is
something like that for souls. Young
souls require more spiritual guidance
and they basically kind of if they're
wise they go where their spiritual
helpers or guardians advise them to go.
And I think it's also true that some
people are so locked in to rigid kind of
behavior patterns that it's hard even in
the afterlife for choice to really enter
in and help them uh digest those
patterns and make new new directions
started. But as we get more experience,
I think our choice increases. We become
more self-directive. We understand
what's happening better. uh and we can
we can make better choices and we are
given the freedom to make those choices.
We're also given the freedom to make bad
choices. It wouldn't be choice if we
didn't have that freedom. Some people uh
Newton, Michael Newton describes, choose
to reject the lies that were offered to
them by their guardians. And when they
incarnate, they then report uh a life
that sort of without a feeling of of u
direction, without a feeling of uh
intuitive alignment with their
circumstances or people because they
literally have incarnated in pure provis
improvisational mode. and they don't
kind of have that inner blueprint that
most of us have that tells us when we
are in alignment with our deeper truths
and when we're out of alignment with our
deeper truth.
What do you think of the often quoted
idea that the last thoughts we have
before we die make a difference in our
trajectory in the afterlife?
I understand that and I think that may
be true in some circumstances. For
example, in Stephvenson's children, if
he asks the question, why do these
people remember what other people do not
remember? He finds that 60% of his
clients died early and the remaining 40%
died on with an acute sense of
unfinished business like a mother who's
just given birth but hasn't raised her
child or an acute sense of being
wrenched from life suddenly quickly. Uh
and so that seems that the ending of
their life did leave a strong imprint on
their next incarnation.
But again remember these are the
exceptions to the a much larger
principle. Um and while I do think our
last thought can have a heavy imprint.
I generally tend to think that
the divine or the ultimate the absolute
consciousness which is behind and within
and manifesting all of this reality is
much more compassionate and
understanding than we give it credit
for. I think we have a tendency to to
make inferences and gather inferences.
Um
but I don't think the last thought is
necessarily that absolutely um
directive. For example, someone who's
dying of cancer and is taking pain uh
painkilling drugs and they die heavily
under the influence of a of this numbing
mind-numbing drug. Does that mean that
they are going to be predisposed towards
addiction in their next incarnation?
Uh I I don't think it works like that. I
think we are brought in we are we are
debriefed. We go into a period of deeper
communication with our guardians and uh
we continue to learn. It's not all
learning doesn't just take place on
earth. We continue to learn and exercise
learning in spiritual reality and then
we make choices on coming back. So that
the choice of coming back may pick up on
our last experience or it may not. U so
I guess the the more programmed we are
the tighter that bond will be but the
more evolved we are I think there's less
less of a bond. In your book, Life
Cycles, you introduce the notion of the
oversoul. And I wonder if you can speak
some to that and how the oversoul plays
its role in your view in the afterlife.
>> When I use the term uh which has been,
you know, in esoteric literature very
common, the oversoul, the Seth material,
it's there.
I kind of have used the term soul in two
different ways. Our our soul is usually
thought of as the conscious entity which
is the holder of my individual life
experience. So Chris Basha's soul is the
psychological construct, the
consciousness construct that holds all
of my life experience.
The being that I return to, the being
that planned my reincarnation is much
much larger than I am. And so this
larger soul is often called the
oversoul. U so the oversoul is really
the soul which holds the memories of all
of our incarnations through time.
Now eventually after finishing writing
that chapter towards the end of the book
I said I'm just going to call that
entity the soul and I and I would
capitalize it to differentiate it from
soul with a small s which is my personal
selfidentity. But soul with a capital S
is the 100,000year-old being. The soul
which chooses my incarnation and which
receives my incarnation back because the
vast majority of our consciousness and
our learning doesn't incarnate in any
lifetime. Michael Newton says if we were
to incarnate all of the soul's power in
one lifetime, all of its substance, it
would basically short out our circuits.
it is we he thinks we incarnate maybe
five to 15 max percent of the power of
the soul and I think something like that
is true however I think we are moving
into a point in humanity's larger story
evolutionary story that we are moving
into a time when I think the soul is
waking up inside humanity
so that there is a process in which we
are moving toward towards greater and
greater incarnation of greater quantity
of our total soul identity in our
historical incarnations.
You know, it's interesting. I love the
fact that you used percentages. So, I'm
going to stick with that for a moment.
And I think I'm going to use the
oversoul and soul language just to make
it easily distinguishable for our
conversation. But in this moment,
there's Chris the soul who's here
talking to me in 2025 on Insights at the
Edge.
>> What percentage of you do you feel is in
that
ray if you will of sunlight of the over
soul sun? Like do you feel more of that
could be you can access it, it's
present, you can tune into it and feel
it or no? You know, 5 to 15%'s pretty
good, Tammy. Come on. Or no, I feel that
ancient
>> hundreds of thousands. I can I can act.
I can touch it.
>> Yeah, I think we can. I mean, I
basically once you kind of have a
vision, an understanding of the
structure of how life works, how
reincarnation is a cycle, but it
accumulates in in spiritual reality as
well as in uh physical reality. But once
we have that, once it then opens up the
possibility that I'm in earth, I've
chosen the circumstances of my life, but
I would like to remember more of who I
am. I would like some deeper guidance
from the higher intelligence, the higher
soul to help guide me in my actions in
this lifetime. And we have all sorts of
technologies that allow us to do that.
All sorts of exercises. Meditation would
be an exercise. hypnotherapy with an
exercise. Even working with yoga,
working with psychedelics puts us in
contact with our soul consciousness and
then you can go beyond soul
consciousness into the larger web of
consciousness that the soul is part of.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Now I have to ask this question one more
about choosing our lives because for
those of us who have a sense of you know
I think I might have chosen my life but
>> why would I choose a life that had so
much suffering in it really
>> really
>> like those parents that I had really I
mean maybe the case of maybe something
else for someone or some early trauma
that was terrible or a later trauma. Why
would I choose that?
>> Yeah I don't want to make light of any
of these any of suffering. I mean I I
don't and I think I get very angry when
I hear people pronounce
how suffering works or you know make
large metaphysical pronouncements on it.
Uh I think we have to be very respectful
of suffering and yet at the same time
hold out the hope that this suffering
has significance. It's that this
suffering is meaningful in a larger uh
landscape. And I take great
encouragement as I studied the past life
therapeutic literature and I watched
therapists basically following a present
pain in a person's life and letting it
unfold into a deeper story that has been
moving through uh several lifetimes up
to this lifetime.
Time and again people have been able to
take their pain to its source in which
it's anchored in experiences that they
don't remember having but because they
come from another lifetime and in that
remembering it provides a freedom and a
release from suffering in their current
lifetime. So when you see that happening
over and over again, it supports the
conclusion that um this suffering is
I don't want to say intentional but it's
accepted as a circumstance of learning.
Uh and then we would ask you're asking
why would we ever want to learn?
What do we have to learn from those
horribly
u depleted or compromised lives? And I
think we have to we have to make a
transition of thinking like a human
being and start thinking like a soul or
thinking it about our lives from God's
perspective because
things that may look meaningless from
the human perspective from the
individual life perspective can be
saturated with meaning at a larger
metaphysical level a larger spiritual
level. And sometimes I think for example
some people have voluntarily taken on
pain memories which are not part of
their personal karmic lineage. Sometimes
I mean in my psychedelic practice I
found that a lot of the work I was doing
a lot of the purging of of negative
karma was not personal. It was
collective. And I think that some I
think many of us are actually living
lives which are serving the release of
trauma
of the from the collective psyche which
goes beyond simply healing the personal
psyche. So there's just we I think we
have to learn to think in a much more
expanded framework to even address
suffering.
You know, Chris, you talk with a lot of
conviction about reincarnation and the
structure of post-mortem experience, a
phrase I'd never even heard before, this
conversation.
And I I wonder how much of that comes
not from your research and academic
learning, but from your own psychedelic
experiences. And if you can share a bit
about how you encountered
past lives, your own past lives, past
life knowing in your psychedelic
journeys and how that's informed this
conviction that you have.
>> Yeah, that's an interesting question
because clearly both of them are
present. I've I've been reading the
reincarnation literature for 40 years
now and uh so
it has very much shaped some of my
thinking
but what really has given that
intellectual knowledge a particular
depth of of conviction has been my
personal experience um both psychedelic
experience but also u hypnotherapy uh
experiences I did three years of
hypnotherapy therapeutic regressions to
explore my deeper history and I worked
found and worked with about a dozen
lives uh worked toward healing them and
they healing me. Um and the psychedelic
experience opens up a whole new
category.
In some of my psychedelic experiences, I
have relived former life uh trauma,
former life clashes with people who are
in my life now. Uh and I've experienced
them. You experience these things so
deeply and so intimately and with so
much detail and such power of access uh
that it
it's overwhelmingly convincing that this
is real. This is not something my mind
is making up in order to do something or
other. It's it's a real memory. And I've
experienced in my psychedelic work
deeper I've been given deeper
understandings of the landscape of life
and how there's this deeper causal
structure that's manifesting itself in
our life in our in our choices through
ourselves into the world.
And then there are those experiences
where
one is taken into
the love and the heart and the mind and
the intelligence and the genius
of God of divine of the universal
spirit.
And when one experiences that just
just the intensity of of the clarity and
the depth of love that's there
then it makes it easier I think to once
the the intellectual horizon expands you
begin to understand that all of these
mechanisms that we are studying they fit
into a larger pattern that this reality
this being or this Oneness has
manifested itself as the universe and us
as part of it as the universe. And this
being does not think in short terms. It
does not think small. It thinks in
billions and billions and billions of
years. And it is growing a universe from
nothing to what we have today and
continuing to develop. And that we are
part of that process. And so when you
touch the essence of your own being and
discover that the essence of your
individual being is one with the essence
of all reality and then drawn into that
all reality to experience the intention
of that reality in creation and the love
that's motivating its creative process.
Then this takes that intellectual
knowledge and and weds it into the heart
and just fuses it into
well let's say a deep conviction that
this is true that it's real. It's just
very simple. It's true and it's real.
>> And what is the intention from your
perspective of the universe itself and
our creation? this power intention. What
does it mean?
>> Boy, that's going right to the deep deep
heart of the matter. And I I have to say
that whatever I understand I'm sure is
incomplete
because the the magnitude of this being
is so vast that even after exploring it
for 20 years as I did I learned late in
the journey that there were dimensions
beyond what I had seen beyond what I had
seen and that I didn't have the grasp on
the totality of it. So I I begin by
saying I don't understand the whole of
it. But what I've seen
leads me to conclude that
some people say that this oneness
creates in order to know itself. And
I've never personally found that very
convincing. Uh I think it's more it
speaks to me more to think that this
oneness creates in order to share itself
in order to increase the creativity of
life forms in existence that it divides
itself into these sparks of light which
become human beings, human souls. And
those souls are actualizing
its power, its potential in this
particular form through the chakras and
that whole system. It's actualizing
higher and higher capacities. So that I
think the
behind creation
is a profound love that seeks to share
its existence in manifold ways as it
knows itself in a singularity.
uh before existence as as an entity as a
consciousness before existence
um I think it's basically to grow to
grow to become more if we try to say
what we're experience you what the goal
of the growth is you know to become
loving and to become this that or the
other anytime we try to pin it down to a
goal I think we're we're we're
anthropomorphizing and shrinking the
horizon that we have to keep an eye
toward that is
we are going to be a very different
species 10,000 years from now. We will
be growing but we will be growing into
things that we might not now even be
able to imagine. So to me to say that
creation is about growing about becoming
more potentiating powers that are latent
within our nature that's a safer
generalization than trying to pin it to
specific things but it is all I think an
exercise in love
>> and your own alignment with that. How do
you experience or attune to aligning
personally with that greater
>> Yeah.
>> defulgence, if you will.
Well, I'm not doing psychedelics
anymore. Uh because that was a that was
a wellworn and and bountiful path. And
now I'm content to simply try to uh
continue to learn the lessons that I was
given and to absorb those lessons and to
integrate those lessons into my life.
And even 20 years after I stopped those
sessions, I feel like sometimes I'm
still just getting started. It it it's
it's a magnificently long process to try
to somehow integrate transtemporal,
transpatial,
you know, deep diamond luminosity kinds
of experience into everyday life. So I
meditate, I do spiritual practices like
we all do.
But because I've been kind of organized
as a teacher and and my psyche works in
the ways of teaching, one of the ways
that I come closest in touch with all of
these deep truths is when I'm sharing
them with other people who are also
seekers. It's in the act of sharing,
in the act of their questions and their
minds coming and touching something
inside me that lets something loose
inside of me which opens up something
deeper inside of them which we move back
and forth in this journey of of learning
that I actually feel myself integrating
more of what I've known in these states
than if I were simply just sitting on a
meditation cushion
doing it in quiet silence. I'm kind of
wired for collective learning together.
>> And in that spirit, let's keep going.
Chris, in your book, Life Cycles, you
introduced the notion of deep time
>> and that deep time is distinct from
timelessness.
>> Yeah.
>> And I wanted to understand here in this
post-mortem
structure of the cosmos.
>> Yeah. When I'm with my over soul, me I
when my soul with the small s is with
>> am I in deep time or timelessness
and help me understand also to begin
just what you mean by deep time and then
let's compare it to timelessness.
>> Okay. Okay, so just so your readers
don't get confused, it it wasn't in life
cycles where I talk about deep time, but
in LSD in the mind of the universe where
I talk extensively about deep time. And
the basic idea is that often we think
that time is linear in inside space and
time, but when you go outside space and
time, there is no linear time. It's all
happening simultaneously. It's eternity.
And I think that's basically uh uh
simplistic that we we find through
psychedelics and through going through
successive death and rebirth processes
and initiations into these things that
there are many modalities of time in the
universe. that the time that the
universe experiences within itself
multiple modalities of time. And as you
push the boundaries of space-time
consciousness, you enter transcendent
spatial experiences and transtemporal
experiences.
deep time. The first time I entered deep
time, I had a series of sessions in
which I experienced my entire life from
beginning to end as simultaneously
present.
How is that possible? And but it was
just simultaneously present and I I I
had insights and I could experience
myself as an old man
when I was 28 years old, 30 years old.
Um
and then when I went deeper into deep
time, I began to be drawn into larger
tracks of time that concern the
evolution of the human species. So just
as the individual has a story and a
timeline, the entire species has a story
and a timeline.
And just as we can kind of recreate
speeding up with photography, we can
speed up time and watch a deeper
unfolding uh take place, even the
movement of continents take place
through animation. Likewise, when you
enter into deep deep time, you can
experience a 100,000 years of evolution
in five minutes
that that hyperco compression. So that
there are multiple modalities of time.
And then far on the outer edges is this
experience of timelessness that you
enter a reality where there is no time.
There's simultaneously present, past and
future, but there is no time. And it's
that's just a mode of the universe. Now,
when we bring all those insights back to
your question, what is the reality of
time and our post-mortem existence?
There is a a sense of continuity. There
is a sense of action which is spread out
over time. It's not necessarily linear
time like it is on earth but there is a
sense of coherence which is temporally
embedded temporally soaked and you can
also move into different temporal
modalities in b in the bardo experience
you can if you have access to these
deeper levels you can go into deeper
levels of time before coming back to bau
time and then before coming back to time
space linear time. So, it's what I would
off what I'd suggest is not a definitive
answer to your question, but more of an
open-endedness
for um thinking about time in a
multi-dimensional universe
>> and timelessness.
Tell me more about that. Timelessness is
a way of describing a particular
experience in terms of what is not
present. It is uh not a time experience.
It's kind of like uh the when the
Buddhists tried to describe uh
enlightenment by describing what it's
not. It's nirvana. It's not a self. It's
not that kind of experience.
When we turn from trying to describe
what it's not to describing what it is,
it gets exponentially more difficult
because I'm trying to describe an
experience where
it is as if time has not yet begun
and it's already finished.
It is a time of it is an experience of
absolute fullness. Everything is present
of all potentialities are present in a
translucent clear form.
And maybe the most striking thing about
it is is that this sense of
timelessness, our time fullness, this
fullness of beyond time
doesn't go away
when time begins inside time and space
that you find that this timelessness
is an innate quality of deep deep mind
which you can tune into
even when you are in your body and in
your incarnation. It is an inherent
quality of existence. Just as oneness
consciousness is an inherent quality of
existence which you can tune into even
when you are in differentiated
consciousness.
So,
>> one of the things I'm curious about,
Chris, is when I first heard about
reincarnation as a young person
>> in the context of Indian philosophy. I
heard about it in the frame of and the
goal is you don't have to reincarnate
again.
>> No, no more once more. It's over. You
get off the wheel.
>> Yeah.
>> And do you step into
timelessness? And I wonder how how you
see that this notion of no, you're
you're not coming all the way back
around again and again and bringing
>> endless learning to the oversoul.
>> Over kaput, done.
>> Yeah. All the religions of the axial age
basically adopted some form of what I
would call an upand-out cosmology. So
you achieve enlightenment in the Hindi
Hindu tradition you achieve moka which
means escape from samsara once you
achieve enlightenment you don't have to
reincarnate again you go on elsewhere
um in the in western religions you
achieve salvation or the grace of god
and then you enjoy the fruits of your
salvation in some offplanet paradise
whether it's the Buddha pure world or
the garden or heaven but the basic
vision is this is a really difficult
place and we want to not be here and we
we almost actually count here by
accident or by some fundamental flaw in
the in human design and we want to get
out of here and I think that's
understandable if you place it in its
historical context where about 5,000
years ago we began to get access to the
deeper consciousness that underlies our
individual consciousness. We began to
have experiential access of the mother
universe of the spiritual reality. And
when you experience the mother universe,
it is so magnificent. It is so ecst
ecstasyfilled
that how could we not but think that we
belong there? There a feeling that we
belong there and that we have fallen out
of it and we want to get back to there.
But now that we have an understanding of
how old the universe is and how long it
this this landscape of existence has
been taken to be brought into reality
and the challenges that that we're
moving toward. I mean we're 13.7 billion
years into a project that's going to be
going on for over a hundred billion
years at least and on. So we're we're
just getting started and I think with
that comes a new understanding which
changes the perspectives of the older
teachings on reincarnation which are the
up andout teachings. Now I think we
begin to understand
that the goal is to bring your life to a
fruition. Now how you describe the
fruition of you know a surrender of
egoic consciousness, an opening into the
oneness of life, an opening into
shunata, emptiness of form, um however
you describe it that the goal is to
achieve that but then to incarnate those
qualities more and more deeply to bring
spiritual reality more deeply into
physical reality. to literally bring
heaven to earth and that in the earth
you know in the last several thousand
years people achieve that realization
and
humanity has not changed and it's almost
like you have to leave in order to
experience that reality in its fullness
unless you're particularly motivated by
compassion and then the bodhic sattas
come back to help other people
but I think what we're witnessing What
we are on the threshold of seeing is
that now the time of individual
enlightenment is over. We have to
enlighten as a species. The entire
species has to make a jump in
consciousness if we are going to survive
the ramifications of our industrial and
scientific technologies. Because if we
don't make a jump, if the world
continues to be run by egos, we're
basically I think we're going to go
extinct. We have to grow up. And I think
growing up means
beginning to bring into our incarnate
consciousness,
our soul consciousness, and what the
soul consciousness holds in its intimate
communion with the divine. So that we
are now engaging a process where we're
beginning to see that the goal of
reincarnation is not to simply achieve a
level of of enlightenment say and then
leave but to achieve that level and to
bring heaven onto earth. Now that
doesn't mean I mean I think that there
people there beings who can and and will
leave once they achieve this level. They
can come back. They can come back any
time. But I think
but I think if we achieve and leave for
a million years and come back, we're
going to find nature doing the same
thing. Growing humanity, growing the
species, making it more intelligent,
more compassionate, more creative, more
saturated with spirituality.
We are in the process of transforming
this planet and making it a divine
garden. But clearly we have a lot of
worries, a lot of work to do still.
>> Now, you said something that tripped me
up a little bit, Chris. You said, you
know, we've been at this 13.7 billion
years and we'll be at it 100 billion.
What what what's going to happen once we
cross the 100red billion mark?
>> I'm just throwing a 100 billion out, not
as a a literal figure, but just it's a
very very large number. It could be a
thousand billion years. Let's we have to
turn to the cosmologists and get their
their take on how long the universe has
got in it. But it's clearly vast
compared to what we have already uh we
have already realized and I when I said
I really I'm saying that the creative
intelligence of the universe has
generated 137.7 billion year history at
least this after this big bang. We don't
know whether there were other big bangs
before this big bang. Uh whether it's
>> once more there'll be another big bang
once more.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Uh
you know there are some traditions like
the vidantic tradition which basically
says the goal of life is to return to
the oneness of all life. So in it's like
the drop returns to the ocean. The drop
disappears and now lives as ocean. not
in ocean but as ocean I don't believe I
don't find that to be true in my
experience in my experience I think
individuality
and by that I mean I'm focused on soul
individuality particularly individuality
is a precious gift given us by the
creator
uh and we don't just when we take that
individuality to a point where we can
penetrate to the depth of our being and
discover our communion with all other
life forms in the oneness of life at
that pinnacle point. I don't think the
universe takes that individually back
and says okay now you can come back into
me and dissolve into the totality. So
whatever whatever happens at 100 billion
years or however many billion years out
whatever it is I think that we are
becoming
century by century ever more empowered
players
in the in the universe not just in the
physical universe but in the reality
behind the physical universe in
spiritual reality I don't think that's
something that's taken away I don't
think it's something that's dissolved D
I think this is one of the great gifts
uh of existence to actually be empowered
to explore more and more potent worlds.
Now let me add this throw something in
column from left field.
I think there are many spiritual
cosmologies which says this physical
universe as big as it is is not the only
universe. There are other universes
overseen by other spiritual beings and
and enlightened masters and so on so
forth. And there are levels of spiritual
reality, many many levels of spiritual
reality. And my experience from
psychedelic work is the deeper you go
into a state of consciousness, the more
you are penetrating a higher level of
energy. The deep states of consciousness
are extremely high energy. And I think
one of the things we are developing here
in our physical incarnations on earth is
developing the kind of clarity and
strength of focus and strength of being
that allows us to enter these deeper
states of consciousness or deeper
intimacies with the divine without
shattering. If we become one with God so
to speak
prematurely or too early, it's just
shattering. It just it completely
shatters us because the the differential
between the divine's energy or that
level of reality and our energy is so
great. We it just explode us. But by
incarnating more and more and and
getting into it gradually and
assimilating those gradual immersions
and initiations, we develop a strength
that allows us to enter consciously and
without risk
the love of God and the knowledge of God
without being destroyed. And I think of
this in terms of the birth of the
diamond soul. We we we give birth to a
the soul reaches a point of gestation of
such intensity and such power that it
can return into various levels of divine
reality and can experience them
consciously without fragmenting its
being. And then it makes choices in that
context whether to incarnate again and
to be part of this mission of evolving
the human species or whether it wants to
go into some other reality.
>> Now you mentioned the diamond soul and I
want to bring all of our listeners along
with us in LSD in the mind of the
cosmos. You you write this.
>> You write about something that occurred
in one of your highdosese psychedelic
sessions and you say that all of your
former lives came to you. All your
previous lives came to you and fused
and there was an explosion of energy
that came out of your chest, a diamond
light. And you describe this as the
birth of the diamond soul. And this
notion that all of your past lives fused
and then an explosion
came from your chest. Help people who
are hearing what? Diamond light, diamond
soul. What's Chris talking about?
>> Yeah, I understand.
My worldview is that reincarnation is a
simple fact of life and it leads to an
accumulation and development of our
lifetimes incarnation by incarnation.
But it also leads to an accumulation at
the level of soul and usually the the
way the system works is when we
incarnate we forget this deeper
identity. We become small and then when
we die we open and become large again.
We return to the boundaries of the soul.
We incarnate, we get small. We die, we
get large. And this has been going on
for thousands and thousands and
thousands of years.
It it just seems logical and it is part
of this experience that uh
I had the experience of my former lives
coming into me
and it was like wrapping a white
filament of of cord on a kite spool and
they fused and when they fused there was
this explosion of energy which
catapulted me of this diamond energy
pure clear clear beautiful white light
catapulted me into a level of reality
that was deeper than any I had entered
up to that point in time in which I was
an individual
but I was an individual without
boundaries of any kind and I was a
larger individual than I had ever known
individuality to be
and contextualized in the teachings that
I was given with this experience I came
to see that this is the next stage of
human evolution.
We have been gestating the future form
of humanity for thousands and thousands
of years. Gestation is long.
Labor is short and intense and
dangerous. We have been justating the
future human for thousands of years. We
are entering into the century I think of
our birth of this higher consciousness
within humanity.
And what happened to me in that session
was being given to me to help me
understand
where reincarnation is taking humanity.
It's taking us not simply in incremental
steps to be better, wiser, smarter, more
creative, but eventually it takes us to
a point where the entire
platform of human awareness shifts to
that of the soul. And I think we can see
the prototypes of this in the in
enlightened masters where they are and
our great saints and great sages. They
are speaking out of a level of awareness
that clearly is beyond most people. And
they are speaking with a depth of
perspective. Love your enemies. What?
Love your enemies? Are you sure? I mean
this is a a totally different
perspective.
So I think the pattern what I
experienced was simply a slice of what
is happening at a larger process. and a
larger process. I think um nature is in
the process of giving birth to what I
call the diamond soul. Other people have
seen this process also. They give it
different names uh but that we converge
in this understanding that there is a
summing up of human history. And as
these former lives come into us, there's
a tremendous purification that has to
take place because a lot of these former
lives are been stupid and done dumb
things and they carry really uh
elemental primitive beliefs. So we
there's a purification where we kind of
winnow these things out and uh heal
these aberrations and and reach new
centers of balance. But also they bring
not only their faults, they bring their
gifts, they bring their creativity, they
bring their successes, they bring their
artistic abilities. All of these things
are coming together and manifesting
as a singular integrated consciousness.
And I doesn't I don't think that means
necessarily remembering all the little
details of each of the informer lives,
their addresses or their, you know,
phone numbers or things like this. It's
internalizing what has been learned in
each of those life scripts. What has
been learned and that we we reclaim this
learning, we experience this learning
that's taking place inside our
incarnation.
Everybody experiences the soul when they
die.
But I think we are in the process of
giving birth to a humanity who is
experiencing the soul fully when they
are alive on earth.
>> Now I just want to clarify something
Chris
>> because I noticed when you talk about
the
religious systems of the axial age and
this upandout emphasis
I I I respond yeah they wanted to get up
and out. they didn't change the world
and bring that expanded
consciousness here to the planet. I want
to do that. I want to be one of those
people who's part of that new embodied.
We're bringing all of that beauty and
love here to Earth. And then another
part of me goes, "Oh, come on. Really?
How impossible, Tammy, to take a
vibration that high, a frequency that
high, and actually bring it into our
human society in the mess that it is.
And you know, then I go back, let's just
get up and out. Come on. And I wonder
how you sort of work with that tension.
>> It does seem hard, doesn't it? When we
look at the world, we look at what's
going on, we wonder, how could we
possibly bring a heart that loves the
entire world into this highly divided
world? It just seems ridiculously
difficult. But then we look around and
we find people who are doing that. You
know, we find great people, social
figures who are doing this like Mahatma
Gandhi or the Daly Lama or um Martin
Luther King. But we also find ordinary
people on the street who just in their
corner of the world, they're bringing
love, compassion, they're bringing
service, they're bringing healing,
they're doing they're they're basically
bringing
the compassion that comes with oneness
into the world. And so my sense is it's
happening all around us. Um it's not
going to happen like a tidal wave that's
going to be big and you know change
everything dramatically or a spontaneous
explosion of spiritual compassion
instantly. But I think organically we
are doing this. I think we are step by
step generation by generation bringing
this uh these higher values into our
physical lives.
uh
at least when I when I stepped back from
human existence in my psychedelic years
when I was going into those deep states
it seemed inevitable
that this is what we would be doing
because there's nowhere else to go and
basically we you know we have a line we
have a circle of we die we go up to some
spiritual reality we incarnate in
physical reality going round and round
and round there's nowhere else to Oh uh
you don't get out of the circle cycle of
life uh simply by being fed up. You
enter into spiritual reality, you come
back into physical reality. Enter into
spiritual reality, come back into
physical reality. That being the case,
there not being a third option
that it is inevitable that spiritual
reality and physical reality becomes
more deeply integrated not only in
spiritual reality but also in physical
reality. It's just what's the
alternative?
>> Okay, one final question for you Chris.
Did you see a vision of
your future life or future lives and
what have you seen?
>> Well, that's an easy one to answer
because the answer is no. I haven't seen
a vision of my future lives.
I basically I have kind of a wish list
for what may happen in the future, but
basically I've let go of that wish list
and I've just turned it all over to the
soul. My soul brought me into existence.
I return to union with my soul. And as a
soul, I trust that entity to make wise
choices for where that entity, my
deepest ent and and being is going to go
and what they're going to do. That's I
just don't know. I don't see enough to
know what would be good for me and what
comes next. I have some guesses and
hunches,
but I don't see enough to really do it.
So, I trust my soul and I trust the the
intelligence behind the soul, the
guardians of the guardian, so to speak.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, I'm certainly so honored,
privileged, and glad that our souls
could meet like this at this time and
place.
>> Yes, me too. And thank you for all the
good work you're doing and bringing into
the world. We need wisdom so much now
and you really help bring a lot of
wisdom into the world. Thank you
>> Christopher Bash. He's the author of the
book Life Cycles and LSD and the Mind of
the Universe. Thanks for being here with
us once more together.
>> Yes. Yes.
And if you'd like to watch Insights at
the Edge on video and participate in the
aftershow Q&A session with our guests,
come join us on Sounds True One, a new
membership community featuring
awardwinning original shows, live
classes, community learning, guided
meditations, and more with the leading
wisdom teachers of our time. Use promo
code podcast to get your first month
free. You can learn more at
join.soundstrue.com.
Sounds true. Waking up the world.
The Sounds True Podcast Network.